1. This Act may be cited as the Traffic Act.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires -
“bicycle” means any bicycle or tricycle not self-propelled;
“cattle” includes oxen, bulls, cows, horses, camels, mules, asses,
sheep, goats and swine;
“certifying officer” means the person appointed to be the certifying
officer under subsection (2) of section 3;
“commercial vehicle” means a motor vehicle constructed or
adapted for the carriage of goods or burdens of any description in
connexion with any trade, business or agriculture, but does not include
any type or class of motor vehicle which the Registrar may, by notice
in the Gazette, declare not to be commercial vehicles for the purposes
of this Act;
“dealer” means any person who deals by way of business in motor
39 of 1953,39 of 1956,
14 of 1958,52 of 1959,
14 of 1960,24 of 1960,
14 of 1962,L.N. 242/1964,
9 of 1967,8 of 1968,
13 of 1968,38 of 1968,
5 of 1971,14 of 1971,
13 of 1972, 4 of 1974,
16 of 1977, 13 of 1980,
14 of 1982, 19 of 1982,
11 of 1983, 10 of 1984,
1 of 1986, 20 of 1989,
14 of 1991, L.N 187 / 1994,
L.N. 290/1994, L.N. 352/1995,
L.N. 393/1995, L.N. 126/1996,
L.N 127/1996, L.N130/1996,
L.N. 163/1997, L.N. 164/1997,
L.N. 112/1999, L.N. 119/2001,
L.N. 159/2001, L.N. 103/2002,
L.N. 104/2002, L.N. 105/2002,
L.N. 132/2002, L.N. 161/2003,
L.N. 179/2003, L.N. 83/2004,
L.N. 97/2004, L.N. 65/2005,
L.N. 55/2006, L.N. 56/2006,
L.N. 57/2006, L.N. 111/2006,
L.N. 33/2007, L.N. 88/2007,
L.N. 89/2007,L.N. 145/2007,
2 of 2007, 7 of 2007,
9 of 2007,
8 of 2008.
Short title.
Interpretation.
52 of 1959, s.2,
13 of 1972, Sch.,
10 of 1984, s. 2,
1 of 1986, s.3.
L.N. 83 of 2004,
LN. 97 of 2004.
8 CAP. 403 Traffic [Rev. 2009
vehicles or trailers;
“dealer’s general licence” means a licence issued under section 23;
“drive”, in relation to a motor vehicle, includes the steering of a
motor vehicle;
“driver” means any person who drives or guides, or is in actual
physical control of, any vehicle or cattle on any road;
“driving licence” means a licence to drive a motor vehicle issued
under this Act, and any document deemed to be a driving licence by
any rules made under this Act;
“driving test examiner” means any person appointed to be a
driving test examiner under subsection (3) of section 3:
“heavy commercial vehicle” means a commercial vehicle whose
tare weight exceeds six thousand seven hundred and twenty pounds;
“highway authority” means the Minister for the time being
responsible for public roads or any other Authority or body to whom
the Minister delegates powers subject to such terms and conditions as
he may deem appropriate.
“inspection certificate” means a certificate affixed to a vehicle
under section 17A;
“inspector” means any person appointed to be an inspector of
vehicles under subsection (3) of section 3;
“invalid carriage” means a motor vehicle specially designed and
constructed for the use of persons suffering from some physical defect
or disability;
“licensing officer” means a licensing officer appointed under
section 3;
“manufacturer” means a manufacturer of motor vehicles and
trailers;
“matatu” means a public service vehicle having a seating
accommodation for not more than twenty-five passengers exclusive of
the driver, but does not include a motor car;
“motor car” means a motor vehicle having seating accommodation
for not more than ten passengers excluding the driver, but does not
2 of 2007.
Rev. 2009] Traffic CAP. 403 9
include a motor cycle;
“motor cycle” means a motor vehicle with less than four wheels
the weight of which unladen does not exceed eight hundredweights;
“motor omnibus” means a public service vehicle having seating
accommodation for more than twenty-five passengers exclusive of the
driver;
“motor vehicle” means any mechanically propelled vehicle,
excluding any vehicle running on a specially prepared way such as a
railway or tramway or any vehicle deriving its power from overhead
electric power cables or such other vehicles as may from time to time
by rules under this Act be declared not to be motor vehicles for the
purposes of this Act;
“owner”, in relation to a vehicle which is the subject of a
hire-purchase agreement or hiring agreement, includes the person in
possession of the vehicle under that agreement;
“plying for hire” includes -
(a) standing on any public taxi stand;
(b) being offered for hire by any notice, advertisement or
announcement;
(c) standing or travelling whilst exhibiting a “For Hire” notice
of any kind;
“provisional licence” means a licence issued under section 32;
“private hire vehicle” means any public service vehicle constructed
or adapted to carry not more than seven passengers, exclusive of the
driver, such vehicle not being a taxicab or matatu;
“public service vehicle” means any motor vehicle which -
(a) is licensed under Part XI to carry passengers for hire or
reward; or
(b) plies for hire or reward or is let out for hire or reward; or
(c) is carrying passengers for hire or reward;
“Registrar” means the Registrar of Motor Vehicles appointed
under section 3;
“road” means any public road within the meaning of the Public
Roads and Roads of Access Act, and includes any other road or way,
wharf, car park, footpath or bridlepath on which vehicles are capable
of travelling and to which the public has access;
Cap. 399.
10 CAP. 403 Traffic [Rev. 2009
“tare weight” means the weight of a vehicle when unladen,
inclusive of the weight of the body and all parts (the heavier being taken
when alternative bodies or parts are used) which are necessary to or
ordinarily used with the vehicle when used on the road;
“taxicab” means any public service vehicle constructed or adapted
to carry not more than seven passengers, exclusive of the driver, which
is registered under any by-laws relating to the licensing and operation
of taxicabs to ply for hire from a taxi rank or other public place within
the area where such by-laws are in force;
“tractor” means a motor vehicle constructed or adapted for the
purpose of hauling trailers but which is not itself designed to carry
goods or passengers;
“trailer” means any vehicle designed to be drawn by a motor
vehicle, but does not include a sidecar attached to a motor cycle;
“traffic signs” means any sign, notice, signal, light or other device
erected or in any way displayed by or with the consent of the highway
authority, for the purpose of regulating, restricting or prohibiting traffic
and vehicles of any kind, on a road:
Provided that all traffic signs shall conform to any regulations as
to size, colour and type which may be prescribed by rules made under
this Act;
“vehicle” includes a motor vehicle, a trailer and any other
conveyance used on a road.
3.(1) The Minister shall, by notice in the Gazette, appoint a
Registrar of Motor Vehicles, who shall be responsible for the registration
and licensing of motor vehicles and trailers and for the licensing of
drivers, and for the keeping of such records in relation thereto as are
required by this Act.
(2) The Registrar shall, by notice in the Gazette, appoint such
licensing officers as may be necessary for the carrying out of the
provisions of this Act.
(3) The Minister shall, by notice in the Gazette, appoint -
(a) a certifying officer, who shall perform such duties under
this Act and any rules made thereunder in relation to the
examination of vehicles as the Minister may direct, and for
the purpose of performing such duties the certifying officer
shall have and may exercise the powers of an inspector under
this Act; and
Appointment of
officers.
52 of 1959, s.3,
L.N. 242/1964. 
Rev. 2009] Traffic CAP. 403 11
(b) such inspectors and driving test examiners as may be
necessary for carrying out the provisions of this Act.
4. For the purposes of this Act, motor vehicles shall be divided
into the following classes -
(a) motor omnibuses;
(b) heavy commercial vehicles;
(c) commercial vehicles;
(d) tractors;
(e) motor cars;
(f) motor-cycles not exceeding fifty cubic centimetres engine
capacity;
(g) motor-cycles exceeding fifty cubic centimetres engine
capacity;
(h) invalid carriages;
(i) special types of motor vehicles for which special authorization
is required from the Registrar before such vehicles can be
registered or used on a road; and
(j) matatus.
 PART II - REGISTRATION OF VEHICLES
5. (1) The Registrar shall keep records of all motor vehicles and
trailers registered in Kenya, and shall cause every licensing officer to
keep records of all vehicles registered by him.
(2) Vehicle records maintained by the Registrar or a licensing
officer shall be open for inspection by any police officer, any collector
of customs and the chairman of the Transport Licensing Board, who
shall be entitled to copy any entry in such records free of charge.
(3) Any person who satisfies the Registrar that he has reasonable
cause therefor shall be entitled on payment of the prescribed fee to a
copy of any entry in such vehicle records.
6. (1) No person shall possess a motor vehicle or trailer, other
than a vehicle exempted from the provisions of this Part, unless such
vehicle is registered under this Act.
(1A) No motor vehicle imported for home use shall be used on a
road unless it is registered:
Provided that a commercial vehicle which requires inspection
under this section shall be registered within fourteen days of
inspection.
Classification.
10 of 1984, s. 3.
Records of vehicles.
Motor vehicles
and trailers to be
registered.
52 of 1959, s.4,
14 of 1982, s.26,
8 of 2008.
12 CAP. 403 Traffic [Rev. 2009
(2) Application for the registration of any vehicle shall be made
to a licensing officer in the prescribed form, and shall be accompanied
by the prescribed fee.
(3) A licensing officer, before he registers any motor vehicle or
trailer, may verify all the particulars in the form of application, and
may, if he thinks fit, send the vehicle to an inspector for examination in
order to satisfy himself that the vehicle is in a fit and proper condition
for the purpose for which it is intended to be used and to conform in
all respects to the provisions of this Act.
(4) If any application is made to register any commercial vehicle
or trailer the load capacity of which has not been declared by the
manufacturers of the chassis, a licensing officer shall not register the
vehicle or trailer until an inspector has determined its load capacity;
and the determination shall be final.
(5) A licensing officer, on being satisfied as to the accuracy of the
particulars contained in a form of application for the registration of a
vehicle, shall assign the vehicle a registration number, which shall be
the identification mark of the vehicle; particulars of the vehicle shall be
forwarded by the licensing officer to the Registrar, who shall enter such
particulars in his records and shall issue to the owner of the vehicle a
registration book, which book, or a duplicate thereof, shall be proof of
registration of the vehicle.
(6) If a registration book has been lost, destroyed or defaced
or the particulars thereon have become illegible, the owner of the
vehicle shall apply in the prescribed form for a duplicate thereof, and
the Registrar, if satisfied as to such loss, destruction, defacement or
illegibility, shall, upon payment of the prescribed fee, issue a duplicate
registration book:
Provided that any registration book which has been lost and is
subsequently found shall forthwith be returned to the Registrar for
cancellation.
(7) In the event of any change of circumstance which affects the
accuracy of the registered particulars of any vehicle, the owner of the
vehicle shall inform the Registrar of such change and shall forward
to him the registration book in order that it may be amended together
with the prescribed fee, and shall supply the Registrar with any further
information which he may require.
(8) If the licensing officer has reason to believe that a motor
vehicle or trailer in respect of which registration has been applied for is
or may be of a type not previously registered under this Part, or is of a 
Rev. 2009] Traffic CAP. 403 13
type so registered but constructed according to different specifications,
he may refuse to register the vehicle or trailer until plans or specifications
thereof have been submitted to and approved by the Registrar.
7. The owner of a vehicle which is required under this Part to be
inspected shall, before the inspection is carried out, pay to a licensing
officer the fee prescribed therefor.
8. The person in whose name a vehicle is registered shall, unless
the contrary is proved, be deemed to be the owner of the vehicle.
9. (1) No motor vehicle or trailer the ownership of which has
been transferred by the registered owner shall be used on a road for
more than fourteen days after the date of such transfer unless the new
owner is registered as the owner thereof.
(2) Upon the transfer of ownership of a motor vehicle or trailer,
the registered owner thereof shall, within seven days from the date of
the transfer, inform the Registrar in the prescribed form of the name and
address of the new owner and deliver to the new owner the registration
book in respect of such vehicle; and the new owner shall, after inserting
particulars of the change of ownership, forward the registration book
with the prescribed fee to the Registrar, whereupon the vehicle shall be
registered in the name of the new owner:
Provided that, where in any case the registered owner of a vehicle
has failed to comply with the provisions of this subsection, the Registrar,
on being satisfied that the registered owner has died or has left Kenya
or cannot be traced or refuses to comply with the provisions of this
subsection, may on payment of the prescribed fee, cause the vehicle to
be registered in the name of the new owner.
(3) Subsections (1) and (2) shall not apply to a change of
possession consequent on a contract of hiring where the period of hiring
does not exceed three months or where the registered owner continues
to employ and pay the driver of the vehicle.
(4) Application for registration of a new owner may be made
before the actual transfer of the vehicle, but the registration of a
new owner shall not be effective until the registration book has been
surrendered to and reissued by the Registrar.
(5) Subsections (1), (2) and (4) shall not apply to any change of
possession of a vehicle which occurs by reason of the vehicle being
lawfully seized under a hire-purchase agreement, but in such event the
following provisions shall apply -
Inspection fee.
52 of 1959, s.5.
Owner of vehicle.
Change of
ownership. 
14 CAP. 403 Traffic [Rev. 2009
(a) the registered owner or his representative shall, within
fourteen days of the seizure, deliver the registration book
to the person who has seized the vehicle, and inform the
Registrar in writing of the change of possession;
(b) such person shall, within fourteen days of receiving the
registration book, apply to the Registrar to be registered as the
owner thereof in place of the registered owner, and shall on
payment of the prescribed fee be registered accordingly.
(6) On the registration of a new owner, the Registrar shall make
the necessary alterations to the registration book, and shall deliver
the amended registration book to the new registered owner; and the
Registrar, if he thinks fit, may issue a new registration book.
10. Notwithstanding the provisions of this Act, a licensing
officer shall not register a motor vehicle unless the owner of the vehicle
satisfies him -
(a) that the vehicle has been lawfully exported from its country
of origin or the country in which it was last registered, and
that such owner is in possession of any export permit in
relation to the export of the vehicle required by the law of
the country of origin or of last registration; and
(b) that the vehicle has been lawfully imported into Kenya.
11. The Minister may, by notice in the Gazette, exempt any
vehicle, class or description of vehicle from the provisions of this
Part.
12. (1) No motor vehicle or trailer registered under this Act or
driven under the authority of a general dealer’s licence shall be used
on a road unless there is fixed thereto in the prescribed manner the
prescribed number of identification plates of the prescribed design and
colour on which is inscribed the identification mark of the vehicle or
of the general dealer’s licence:
Provided that identification plates used under the authority of a
general dealer’s licence may be suspended from the vehicle and not
fixed.
(2) (Deleted by 4 of 1974.)
13. The owner of a vehicle shall, when requested by a police
officer, produce for inspection, either immediately to the police officer or
within five days of the request being made, at a police station nominated
by the owner, the registration book issued in respect of the vehicle.
No registration
of motor vehicles
exported or imported
unlawfully.
Vehicles may be
exempted from
registration.
L.N.242/1964.
Vehicles to carry
identification plates.
4 of 1974, Sch.
Production of
registration book. 
Rev. 2009] Traffic CAP. 403 15
14. Any person who contravenes or fails to comply with any
of the provisions of this Part shall be guilty of an offence and liable
on first conviction to a fine not exceeding one thousand shillings or
to imprisonment for a term not exceeding three months, and on each
subsequent conviction to a fine not exceeding two thousand shillings or
to imprisonment for a term not exceeding six months or to both.
 PART III - LICENSING OF VEHICLES
15. (1) No person shall own or possess a motor vehicle or trailer,
or use it on a road, unless such vehicle or trailer is licensed under and
in accordance with this Part.
(2) Where the owner or person in possession of a motor vehicle
or trailer gives written notice to the Registrar that for a stated period he
does not intend that it shall be used on any road, or where he satisfies
the Registrar that for a stated period such vehicle or trailer was not
used on any road, he shall not, after the receipt of such notice by the
Registrar or, as the case may be, after the Registrar is so satisfied, be
liable to conviction under or by virtue of this section by reason only of
his ownership or possession of the vehicle or trailer during the stated
period.
(3) The Minister may by notice in the Gazette exclude any vehicle,
or any class or description of vehicle, from the operation of all or any
of the provisions of this Part.
16. Applications for licences under this Part shall be made to a
licensing officer in the prescribed form accompanied by the fee payable
and the vehicle registration book.
17. (1) A licensing officer shall issue a licence only if he is
satisfied-
(a) that the vehicle is duly registered; and
(b) that the particulars in the registration book are correct;
and
(c) that the vehicle is insured against third party risks in
accordance with the provisions of the Insurance (Motor
Vehicles Third Party Risks) Act; and
(d) that the licence in respect of such vehicle has not been
cancelled under subsection (3) of section 58.
(2) Before issuing a licence in respect of any motor vehicle
or trailer of a class prescribed for the purposes of this subsection, a
licensing officer shall require the applicant to produce an inspection
report showing that the vehicle or trailer has been examined by an
inspector during the months immediately preceding the commencement
Penalties under Part.
Motor vehicles and
trailers to be licensed.
14 of 1958, s. 2,
L.N. 242/1964.
Application for
licence.
Conditions for issue
of licence.
52 of 1959, s.6,
13 of 1980, Sch.
Cap. 405. 
16 CAP. 403 Traffic [Rev. 2009
of the licence and that the vehicle or trailer complies with the provisions
of this Act and of any rules made thereunder:
Provided that no such inspection report shall be required in the
case of a vehicle which is intended to be used as an omnibus and in
respect of which a certificate of fitness issued under paragraph (g) of
subsection (3) of section 96, and dated not earlier than ten months before
the commencement of the licence, is produced.
(3) Where under this section the owner of any vehicle or trailer is
required to have it examined by an inspector, he shall make application
in the prescribed form, paying such fee as may be prescribed, and
thereupon an inspector shall examine the vehicle or trailer and shall
issue an inspection report in the prescribed form.
17A. (1) Where -
(a) an inspector issues an inspection report for the purposes
of section 17 (2) showing that a motor vehicle or trailer
complies with the provisions of this Act and of any rules
made thereunder; or
(b) a certifying officer issues a certificate of fitness in respect
of a public service vehicle under section 96 (3) (g),
the inspector or the certifying officer, as the case may be, shall affix to
the vehicle or trailer in the prescribed manner an inspection certificate
in the prescribed form.
(2) The inspection certificate shall relate to and bear the same
number as the inspection report or certificate of fitness, as the case
may be.
(3) No motor vehicle or trailer of a class prescribed for the
purposes of section 17 (2) shall be used on a road unless an inspection
certificate which is -
(a) valid and in force at the time; and
(b) legible and in no way defaced or mutilated, is affixed to the
vehicle or trailer.
18. Every vehicle licence shall be in the prescribed form.
19. (1) Vehicle licences, other than a dealer’s general licence,
may be issued for such periods and upon payment of such fees as may
be prescribed:
Provided that, where a period is so prescribed, a licence issued
before the period is prescribed shall not be invalid solely by reason that
the period for which it was issued is different from that prescribed.
Vehicle inspection
certificates.
1 of 1986, s. 3A.
Form of licences.
14 of 1962, s.2.
Fees and duration of
licences.
14 of 1962, ss. 3
and 8. 
Rev. 2009] Traffic CAP. 403 17
(2) The holder of a vehicle licence, other than a dealer’s general
licence, shall, on surrendering it for cancellation to the Registrar, be
entitled to such refund as may be prescribed:
Provided that, where the refund as calculated includes part of a
shilling, the refund shall exclude such part of a shilling.
20. No vehicle which is required to be licensed shall be used on
a road unless the licence, which shall be legible and in no way defaced,
is carried on the vehicle in the prescribed manner.
21. If a vehicle licence is lost, defaced, mutilated or rendered
illegible, the Registrar shall issue a duplicate licence on payment of
the prescribed fee:
Provided that any licence which has been lost and is subsequently
found shall forthwith be returned to the Registrar for cancellation.
22. (1) The holder of a vehicle licence shall apply for a new
licence-
(a) where he desires to use the vehicle for any purpose not
authorized by the licence; and
(b) where the vehicle is so altered that a higher duty or a duty of
a different class is required.
(2) A new licence under this section shall not be issued until the old
licence has been surrendered, and in respect of every such new licence
there shall be deducted from the fee payable therefor a rebate calculated
in like manner as is provided in subsection (2) of section 19.
23. (1) The Registrar may issue to a dealer in, or manufacturer or
repairer of, motor vehicles, upon application in the prescribed form and
upon payment of the prescribed fees, such number of dealer’s general
licences as the applicant may require, and with each such licence shall
issue two identification plates.
(2) Subject to sections 24, 25, 26 and 27 and to any other
conditions which may from time to time be prescribed, the holder of a
dealer’s general licence shall use the licence only in respect of vehicles
in his possession; and shall not use more than one such vehicle under
the authority of one licence at any one time.
24. (1) No vehicle shall be used on any road under the authority
of a dealer’s general licence -
(a) to convey passengers or goods for profit or reward;
(b) to carry or convey any goods whatsoever except such load
as may be necessary for the purpose of testing the motor
Licence to be carried
on vehicle.
Duplicate licences.
New licence to be
applied for in certain
circumstances.
Dealer’s general
licence.
Use of dealer’s
general licence.
52 of 1959, s.7.
18 CAP. 403 Traffic [Rev. 2009
vehicle or trailer, and no such load, and no part thereof, shall
be removed from the motor vehicle or trailer at any time
between the departure from and the return to the loading
place of the motor vehicle or trailer, save in the case of an
accident; or
(c) except with the permission in writing of the Registrar, for
any purpose other than -
(i) for proceeding to or returning from any inspection, examination or test as provided for by this Act;
(ii) for proceeding from the premises of a dealer to a railway
station or wharf for entraining or shipment, or from a
train or ship to such premises; or
(iii) for test or trial during or after completion, construction,
assembly or repair; or
(iv) for test or trial by or on behalf of an intending purchaser,
or for proceeding to or from the place where the purchaser
intends to keep it; or
(v) for proceeding to or from a public weighbridge for the
purpose of its weight being ascertained or to or from a
place for registration;
(vi) for exportation to any territory in East Africa, the Sudan
or Zaire;
(vii) for proceeding from the premises of a dealer to the
premises of a purchaser or of another dealer or manufacturer;
(viii) for towing a motor vehicle which while being driven
upon a road has become unable to proceed under its own
power from the place where it has broken down to a place
for repair or storage;
(ix) for proceeding to or returning from a workshop in which
a body is to be or has been fitted to the motor vehicle or
where the motor vehicle is to be or has been painted or
repaired; or
(x) for proceeding to or returning from an exhibition of
motor vehicles.
(2) In any proceedings under this section, the burden of proving
the fact of an accident for the purposes of paragraph (b) of subsection
(1) shall lie on the person charged.
(3) No vehicle shall be used on any road under the authority of
a dealer’s general licence unless the holder of the licence, or a person
duly authorized by him, accompanies the vehicle.
(4) Not more than two persons, in addition to the driver, shall
be carried within or upon any such vehicle, and such persons shall be
limited to a prospective purchaser and his agent or a member of his 
Rev. 2009] Traffic CAP. 403 19
family or, in the case of a vehicle proceeding to or from an accident,
two mechanics.
(5) Upon the issue of a dealer’s general licence, the Registrar
shall also supply to the person to whom such licence is issued a book
in a form approved by the Registrar, in which the holder of such licence
shall on each occasion and before such licence is used complete in
duplicate the entries for which provision is therein made; one copy
of such entries shall remain in the book, and the other copy shall be
carried with the vehicle during the whole of the journey to which such
entries relate, and shall be produced at any time during such journey
by the driver for inspection upon demand made by any police officer,
licensing officer or inspector.
(6) Every such book shall be produced at all reasonable times for
inspection by any police officer, licensing officer or inspector, and shall
be kept available for inspection at the place specified in the declaration
made on application for the general dealer’s licence as the place at which
the book will be kept.
(7) No person shall deface or mutilate any such book, or make
any entry therein which is to his knowledge false or misleading, or alter
or obliterate any entry made therein, or except as provided by this Act
make any entry therein or addition thereto, or after its removal from
such book make, alter or obliterate any entry in any copy to be carried
on the vehicle.
25. (1) A dealer’s general licence shall continue in force until the
31st December next following the date of issue.
(2) Every dealer’s general licence shall cease to be valid if the
dealer ceases to carry on business in the district for which it is issued.
(3) When a dealer’s general licence expires or is cancelled or
otherwise ceases to be valid under this Act, the holder of the licence
shall deliver to the Registrar the identification plates which were issued
to the holder with the licence:
Provided that upon the expiry of the licence the holder may retain
the identification plates issued with the licence if he applies for and is
issued with a new licence in respect of the same identification plates
and the new licence would during the period of its validity authorize
the use of such identification plates in the same manner as the expired
licence.
26. (1) The Registrar may at any time cancel a dealer’s general
licence for a breach of any of the provisions of this Act or of any
regulations made thereunder which relate to dealer’s general licences.
Duration of dealer’s
general licence.
Cancellation of
dealer’s general
licence.
20 CAP. 403 Traffic [Rev. 2009
(2) The Registrar shall give notice of the cancellation to the
person to whom the licence was issued, and may make to such person
a refund calculated in like manner as is provided in subsection (2) of
section 19.
(3) Any person holding a dealer’s general licence who is aggrieved
by the decision of the Registrar under this section may, within one month
from the date of the service on him of notice of cancellation, appeal to
a subordinate court of the first class.
27. A dealer’s general licence shall not be used for any purpose
other than a purpose provided for in this Act, and shall not be transferred
or assigned to any other person without the authority of the Registrar.
28. Where under this Part a licence is required and has not been
obtained, a sum equal to the prescribed fee payable in respect of such
licence shall be due and owing to the Controller of Inland Revenue by the
person failing to obtain the licence, and shall be a civil debt recoverable
summarily at the instance of the Controller of Inland Revenue.
29. (1) Any person who contravenes or fails to comply with any
of the provisions of this Part shall be guilty of an offence and liable
on first conviction to a fine not exceeding one thousand shillings or
to imprisonment for a term not exceeding three months, and on each
subsequent conviction to a fine not exceeding two thousand shillings or
to imprisonment for a period not exceeding six months or to both.
(2) If any person is convicted of an offence under this section
in a case where a licence fee under this Part is payable and has not
been paid, the court may, whether or not any other penalty is imposed,
impose a fine (which shall be disposed of in the same manner as the
fee payable on the licence) of an amount equivalent to the fee unpaid,
and the payment of such fine shall operate in satisfaction of any civil
debt due under section 28.
PART IV - DRIVING LICENCES
30. (1) No person shall drive a motor vehicle of any class on a
road unless he is the holder of a valid driving licence or a provisional
licence endorsed in respect of that class of vehicle.
(2) No person who owns or who has charge of a motor vehicle of
any class shall cause or permit any person to drive such motor vehicle
unless such person is the holder of a valid driving licence or a valid
provisional licence endorsed in respect of that class of motor vehicle.
Dealer’s general
licence not to be
transferred without
authority.
Recovery of licence
fees by civil process.
14 of 1958, s. 3.
Penalties under this
Part.
14 of 1958, s. 4.
Drivers to be
licensed.
14 of 1971, Sch.,
1 of 1986, s. 4. 
Rev. 2009] Traffic CAP. 403 21
(3) No person shall be entitled to more than one driving licence,
but a driving licence may be endorsed to permit the holder to drive one
or more classes of motor vehicle.
(4) Driving licences shall be issued, and upon expiry renewed
on production, by a licensing officer upon payment of the prescribed
fee, and a driving licence so issued or renewed may be expressed to be
valid for a period of twelve months or of three years, from the date of
issue or renewal, at the option of the holder thereof.
(5) In the event of any change of circumstances which affects the
accuracy of any particulars declared under paragraph (b) of subsection
(1) of section 31, or which would operate to prevent the grant of a
driving licence under that section, the holder of the driving licence shall
forthwith inform the Registrar of the change.
(6) Any person who contravenes or fails to comply with this
section shall be guilty of an offence and liable -
(a) on first conviction to a fine not exceeding two thousand
shillings or to imprisonment for a term not exceeding three
months; and
(b) on each subsequent conviction to a fine not exceeding
five thousand shillings or to imprisonment for a term not
exceeding six months or to both.
31. (1) A licensing officer shall not grant an applicant a driving
licence endorsed in respect of any class of motor vehicle unless the
applicant -
(a) satisfies the licensing officer that he has passed a test
of competence to drive that class of motor vehicle
conducted under section 39, or that he holds a certificate
of competency for that class of motor vehicle issued under
the Traffic Ordinance (now repealed), or is the holder
of a valid driving licence for that class of motor vehicle
granted by a competent authority in some part of the
Commonwealth where such driving licences are granted
only after a prescribed test has been passed or is the holder
of an international driving permit.
(b) makes a declaration in the prescribed form as to whether
or not he is suffering from any such disease or physical
disability as may be specified in the form, or any other
physical disability which would be likely to cause the driving
by him of a motor vehicle, being a vehicle of such class as he
would be authorized by the licence to drive, to be a source
of danger to the public; and
(c) is able to read, with glasses if worn, a motor vehicle
identification plate at a distance of twenty-five metres.
Conditions for
granting of driving
licence.
9 of 1967, Sch.,
11 of 1983, Sch.
Cap. 232 (1948).
22 CAP. 403 Traffic [Rev. 2009
(2) If it appears to a licensing officer that there is reason to believe
that an applicant for any driving licence is suffering from disease or
physical disability likely to cause the driving by him of a motor vehicle,
of the class or classes in respect of which the application for a licence
is made, to be a source of danger to the public, he may refuse to grant
such application unless the applicant -
(a) produces a certificate from a medical practitioner, stating
that in the opinion of such medical practitioner the applicant
is physically fit to drive the class or classes of motor vehicle
in question; and
(b) undergoes and passes a driving test.
(3) Any person who is aggrieved by the refusal of the Registrar or
a licensing officer to grant a licence may, after giving to the Registrar
notice of his intention so to do, appeal to a subordinate court of the
first or second class, which shall after considering the grounds for such
refusal make such order as it thinks fit, and any order so made shall be
binding on the Registrar.
32. (1) Notwithstanding subsection (1) of section 31, a licensing
officer may grant an applicant for a driving licence a provisional licence
endorsed in respect of any class or classes of motor vehicle which if he
held a driving licence he would be entitled to drive, in order that the
applicant may learn to drive such class or classes of vehicle.
(2) Whenever the driving licence of any person has been cancelled
or suspended, a licensing officer may, on application, so soon as the
period of cancellation or suspension is over, grant to such person a
provisional licence endorsed in respect of any class or classes of vehicle
which if he held a driving licence he would be entitled to drive, with a
view to such person passing any necessary test.
(3) Provisional licenses shall be valid for three months only but
may, in the discretion of the licensing officer, be renewed for further
periods of three months on payment of the prescribed fee for granting
a provisional licence.
(4) Any person holding a provisional licence driving a motor
vehicle shall comply with all such conditions as shall be prescribed.
33. (1) No driving licence or provisional licence shall be granted
to any person -
(a) under the age of sixteen years;
(b) under the age of eighteen years, except in respect of motorcycles; or
(c) endorsed in respect of matatus and motor-omnibuses,
unless he -
Provisional driving
licence.
Driving licence not to
be granted to persons
under certain ages.
11 of 1983, Sch.,
10 of 1984, s.4. 
Rev. 2009] Traffic CAP. 403 23
(i) is over the age of twenty-four years; and
(ii) has for not less than four years held a licence endorsed
in respect of motor-cars or commercial vehicles:
 Provided that any person who satisfies the licensing officer
that he has, before the commencement of this Act, been in
possession of a licence authorizing him to drive a motor
vehicle in Kenya shall, subject to subsection (2) of section 31,
notwithstanding the provisions of this section, be entitled to
receive a licence in respect of the same class or description of
vehicles which he is by such licence authorized to drive.
(2) If the applicant for a driving licence fails to produce his birth
certificate, the opinion of the licensing officer shall be conclusive as
to a person’s age.
34. (1) Applications for driving licences and provisional licences
shall be made to a licensing officer in the prescribed form, accompanied
by the prescribed fee, and the particulars required in such form shall be
signed by the applicant.
(2) Subject to subsection (3) of section 30, any person holding a
driving licence endorsed in respect of any class of motor vehicle who
wishes his licence endorsed in respect of another class or classes of
motor vehicles shall apply to a licensing officer in the prescribed form
and pay the prescribed fee, and the particulars and declaration in such
form shall be signed by the applicant.
35. Notwithstanding this Part, the Minister may make rules
prescribing special terms and conditions for the issue of driving licences
to members of the armed forces or any foreign military, naval or air
forces lawfully present in Kenya for the purpose of driving service
vehicles while on duty, and he may in such rules order that such licences
shall be issued without the payment of any fee.
36. (1) Any person driving a motor vehicle on a road shall carry
his driving licence or provisional licence, and on being so required by
a police officer, produce it for examination.
(2) For the purposes of this section, “driving licence or provisional
licence” includes such other evidence as will satisfy the police that there
is no contravention of section 30.
(3) Any person who contravenes or fails to comply with this
section shall be guilty of an offence and liable to a fine not exceeding
one hundred shillings.
Form of application.
Issue of driving
licences to members
of armed forces.
L.N. 242/1964,
9 of 1967, Sch.
Production of driving
licence on demand.
1 of 1986, s. 5. 
24 CAP. 403 Traffic [Rev. 2009
37. (1) A driving licence shall be in the form of a computerized
smart card made of plastic material containing a micro-processor-based
chip, and provisional licences shall be in the prescribed form, which
shall be impressed with the official stamp of the issuing authority.
(2) The driving licence shall have -
(a) a front side, which shall contain the Personal Identification
Number (PIN) and Identity Card Number, photograph,
name, date of birth, sex, signature, and licence number of
the licence holder, and the class of the vehicle to be driven
or restricted; and
(b) a rear side, which shall contain the thumb print of the licence
holder, the date of issue per class, the date of expiry per
class, conditions and any other information, if any, and the
signature and reference number of the issuing authority.
(3) The micro-processor based chip shall contain features for
micro-printing, image hosting, ultra-violet printing (logo), the national
coat of arms, hologram, and both side lamination.
(4) The micro-processor based chip shall contain the driver’s
name, biometric information, the photograph, signature, licence number,
class of vehicle to be driven or restricted, the date of issue, the date of
expiry, conditions or other information, if any, and the signature and
reference number of the issuing authority.
38. If a driving licence or provisional licence is lost, defaced
or mutilated, the Registrar shall, upon application being made in the
prescribed form and upon payment of the prescribed fee, issue to the
holder a duplicate licence or provisional licence:
Provided that where any licence or provisional licence which has
been lost is subsequently found the holder shall forthwith deliver up to
the licensing officer such duplicate.
39. (1) Driving tests for the purpose of this Act shall be conducted
by driving test examiners.
(2) Driving tests shall be carried out in such manner as the Minister
may direct, but shall in any case include a test of the applicant’s -
(a) knowledge of the rules of the road;
(b) knowledge of recognized road signals and road signs;
(c) knowledge of any authorized road or highway code; and
(d) physical fitness to drive a motor vehicle of the class for
which the licence is required.
Form of driving and
provisional licence.
7 of 2007.
Duplicate licences.
Driving tests.
52 of 1959, s.8.
Rev. 2009] Traffic CAP. 403 25
(3) No person shall undergo a test until he has paid the prescribed
fee.
40. (1) Upon application by a police officer of or above the rank
of Superintendent, the Registrar may-
(a) revoke the driving licence of any person who appears, in
the opinion of the Registrar, to be suffering from a disease
or disability likely to cause the driving by him of a motor
vehicle to be a source of danger to the public; or
(b) order a fresh driving test in the case of any holder of a
driving licence who appears to the Registrar to be so deficient
in driving ability as to be a source of danger to the public,
and, if the licence holder fails to pass such test, order that
his licence shall be revoked.
(2) Where the Registrar has revoked a driving licence under
subsection (1), the owner of such licence shall deliver his driving licence
to the Registrar, who shall endorse on it the reason for its revocation.
(3) The Registrar shall restore a driving licence revoked
under subsection (1) to the person in question under the following
conditions-
(a) in the case of a licence revoked under paragraph (a) of
subsection (1), if he satisfies the Registrar, by means of a
certificate from a medical practitioner, that he is suffering
from no disease or physical disability likely to cause the
driving by him of a motor vehicle, of the class or classes in
respect of which his licence was issued, to be a source of
danger to the public; and
(b) in the case of a licence revoked under paragraph (b) of
subsection (1), if he passes the prescribed test for the class
or classes of motor vehicle in respect of which his licence
was originally granted.
(4) Any person who is aggrieved by the revocation of a licence
under this section may, after giving to the Registrar notice of his
intention so to do, appeal to a subordinate court of the first or second
class, which shall, after considering the grounds for such revocation,
make such order as it thinks fit, and any order so made shall be binding
on the Registrar.
41. Any person who contravenes or fails to comply with any
of the provisions of this Part shall be guilty of an offence and liable,
where no penalty is specifically provided, on first conviction to a fine
not exceeding one thousand shillings or to imprisonment for a term not
exceeding three months, and on each subsequent conviction to a fine
not exceeding two thousand shillings or to imprisonment for a term not
exceeding six months or to both.
Revocation, etc., of
driving licences upon
application by police.
1 of 1986, s.6.
Penalties under this
Part.
1 of 1986, s.7. 
26 CAP. 403 Traffic [Rev. 2009
PART V - DRIVING AND OTHER OFFENCES RELATING TO THE USE OF
VEHICLES ON ROADS
42. (1) No person shall drive, or, being the owner or person in
charge of a vehicle, cause or permit any other person to drive, a vehicle
on a road at a speed greater than such speed as may be prescribed as
the maximum speed for that class of vehicle.
(2) On a vehicle subject to a speed restriction under subsection (1)
except a vehicle registered as a motor-car or motor-cycle or a private hire
vehicle, there shall be painted or affixed to the rear, as close as possible
to the rear number plate and so as to be clearly legible to a person within
ten metres of the rear of the vehicle, a mark in the prescribed form
indicating its maximum permitted speed in kilometres per hour.
(3) No person shall drive, or, being the owner or person in charge
of a vehicle, cause or permit any other person to drive, any vehicle at
a speed exceeding fifty kilometres per hour on any road within the
boundaries of any trading centre, township, municipality or city:
Provided that the highway authority shall erect and maintain
traffic signs as prescribed so as plainly to indicate to drivers entering
or leaving such roads or areas where the fifty kilometre per hour speed
limit restriction begins and ends.
(4) Notwithstanding subsections (1) and (3), it shall be lawful
for the Minister -
(a) to impose on any road such lower limit of speed as it
considers necessary in circumstances when, by reason of
repairs, reconstruction or damage to the road or the condition
of the road, any lower limit of speed is necessary for the
public-safety or to prevent damage to the road:
 Provided that such lower limit shall be imposed only for such
period as is necessary to carry out repairs or reconstruction
or until the condition of the road is satisfactory;
(b) to impose on any road or area, either permanently or for
such time as he considers appropriate, such lower limit of
speed as may be necessary to prevent damage to the road or
for the safety of the public having regard to any permanent
or temporary hazards, the alignment or characteristics of
the road, the width of streets, nature of traffic or general
development of the area:
Provided that, in any case whilst such lower limit is in force under
this subsection, indication of the maximum speed permitted shall be
Speed of motor
vehicles.
14 of 1971, Sch.,
11 of 1983, Sch.,
1 of 1986, s.8.
Rev. 2009] Traffic CAP. 403 27
given by prescribed traffic signs erected and maintained so as plainly
to indicate to drivers entering or leaving such restricted road where the
lower speed limit begins and ends.
(4A). The Minister may by notice in the Gazette delegate the
power conferred by subsection (4) to a highway authority or other
public body.
(4B). A delegation under subsection (4A) may -
(a) be made subject to such conditions, exceptions and
limitations as are specified in the notice;
(b) be made either generally or with respect to any particular
road or area; and
(c) be revoked or varied by a subsequent notice made in like
manner,
and shall not prevent the exercise by the Minister of any power so
delegated.
(5) The provisions of this section or of this or any other Act,
imposing a speed limit on motor vehicles, shall not apply to any vehicle
on an occasion when it is being used for fire brigade, ambulance or
police purposes, if the observance of such provisions would be likely
to hinder the use of the vehicle for the purpose for which it is being
used on that occasion.
(6) Nothing in subsection (5) authorizes a person to use a motor
vehicle for fire brigade, ambulance or police purposes in contravention
of any other provision of this Act.
43. (1) Any person who contravenes or fails to comply with any
of the provisions of section 42 shall be guilty of an offence and liable
to a fine of not less than two hundred shillings and not exceeding two
thousand shillings.
(2) A first or second conviction for an offence under this section
shall not render the offender liable to be disqualified for holding
or obtaining a licence for a longer period than, in the case of a first
conviction, one month, or in the case of a second conviction three
months:
Provided that, if the offender has been convicted of reckless or
dangerous driving within the three years immediately preceding the
date of his conviction for an offence under this section, such previous
conviction shall be treated for the purposes of this subsection as if it
had been a conviction for an offence under this section.
Penalties in relation
to speed.
1 of 1986,